They call you the Godfather of AI. So,
what would you be saying to people about
their career prospects in a world of
super intelligence? Train to be a
plumber. Really? Yeah.
Okay, I'm going to become a plumber.
Geoffrey Hinton is the Nobel
Prize-winning pioneer whose
groundbreaking work has shaped AI and
the future of humanity. Why do they call
you the Godfather of AI? Because there
weren't many people who believed that we
could model AI on the brain so that it
learned to do complicated things like
recognize objects in images or even do
reasoning. And I pushed that approach
for 50 years. And then Google acquired
that technology. And I worked there for
10 years on something that's now used
all the time in AI. And then you left?
Yeah. Why? So that I could talk freely
at a conference.
What did you want to talk about freely?
How dangerous AI could be.
I realized that these things will one
day get smarter than us. And we've never
had to deal with that. And if you want
to know what life's like when you're not
the apex intelligence, ask a chicken.
So, there's a risks that come from
people misusing AI. And then there's
risks from AI getting super smart and
suddenly it doesn't need us. Is that a
real risk? Yes, it is. But they're not
going to stop it because it's too good
for too many things. What about
regulations? They have some but they're
not designed to deal with those sort of
threats. Like the European regulations
have a clause that say, "None of these
apply to military uses of AI." Really?
Yeah, it's crazy. One of your students
left OpenAI. Yeah. He was probably the
most important person behind the
development of the early versions of
ChatGPT. And I think he left because he
had safety concerns. We should recognize
that this stuff is an existential
threat. And we have to face the
possibility that unless we do something
soon, we're near the end.
So, let's do the risks and what we end
up doing in such a world.
This has always blown my mind a little
bit. 53% of you that listen to this show
regularly haven't yet subscribed to this
show. So, could I ask you for a favor
before we start? If you like this show
and you like what we do here and you
want to support us, the free simple way
that you can do just that is by hitting
the subscribe button. And my commitment
to you is if you do that, then I'll do
everything in my power, me and my team,
to make sure that this show is better
for you every single week. We'll listen
to your feedback. We'll find the guest
that you want me to speak to. And we'll
continue to do what we do. Thank you so
much.
Geoffrey Hinton.
They call you the Godfather of AI.
Uh yes, they do.
Why do they call you that?
There weren't that many people who
believed that we could make neural
networks work, artificial neural
networks. So, for a long time in AI,
from the 1950s onwards,
there were kind of two ideas about how
to do AI.
One idea was that sort of core of human
intelligence was reasoning.
And to do reasoning, you needed to use
some form of logic.
And so, AI had to be based around logic.
And in your head, you must have
something like symbolic expressions that
you manipulated with rules. And that's
how intelligence worked.
And things like learning or reasoning by
analogy, they'd all come later once we
figured out how basic reasoning works.
There was a different approach, which is
to say,
"Let's model AI on the brain cuz
obviously the brain makes us
intelligent. So, simulate a network of
brain cells on a computer and try and
figure out how you would learn strengths
of connections between brain cells so
that it learned to do complicated things
like recognize objects in images or
recognize speech or even do reasoning."
I pushed that approach for like 50
years.
Because so few people believed in it,
there weren't many good universities
that had groups that did that. So, if
you did that, the best young students
who believed in that came and worked
with you. So, I was very fortunate in
getting a whole lot of really good
students.
Some of which have gone on to create and
play an instrumental role in creating
platforms like OpenAI. Yes, so Ilya
Sutskever would be a
a nice example. A whole bunch of them.
Why did you
believe that modeling it off the brain
was a more effective approach?
It wasn't just me believed it. Early on,
von Neumann believed it.
And Turing believed it. And if either of
those had lived, I think AI would have
had a very different history. But they
both died young.
You think AI would have been here
sooner? I think neural net the neural
net approach would have been accepted
much sooner if either of them had lived.
In this season of your life, what
mission are you on?
My main mission now is to warn people
how dangerous AI could be.
Did you know that when you
became the Godfather of AI? No, not
really. I was quite slow to understand
some of the risks. Some of the risks
were always very obvious like people
would use AI to make autonomous lethal
weapons.
That is, things that go around deciding
by themselves who to kill.
Other risks, like the idea that they
would one day get smarter than us
and maybe we'd become irrelevant.
I was slow to recognize that. Other
people recognized it
20 years ago. I only recognized a few
years ago that that was a real risk that
was come might be coming quite soon. How
could you not have foreseen that if if
with everything you know here about
cracking the ability for these computers
to learn similar to how humans learn and
just, you know, introducing any rate of
improvement? It's a very good question.
How could you not have seen that? But
remember neural networks 20, 30 years
ago were very primitive in what they
could do. They were nowhere near as good
as humans but things like vision and
language and speech recognition.
The idea that you have to not worry
about it getting smarter than people,
that seemed silly then.
When did that change? It changed for the
general population when ChatGPT came
out.
It changed for me when I realized that
the kinds of digital intelligences we're
making have something that makes them
far superior to the kind of biological
intelligence we have.
If I want to share information with you,
so I go off and I learn something.
And I'd like to tell you what I learned.
So, I produce some sentences.
This is a rather simplistic model but
roughly right. Your brain is trying to
figure out, "How can I change the
strengths of connections between neurons
so I might have put that word next?" And
so, you'll do a lot of learning when a
very surprising word comes. And not much
learning when if it's a when it's a very
obvious word. If I say fish and chips,
you don't do much learning when I say
chips. But if I say fish and cucumber,
you do a lot more learning. You wonder,
"Why did I say cucumber?"
So, that's roughly what's going on in
your brain. I'm predicting what's coming
next.
That's how we think it's working. Nobody
really knows for sure how the brain
works. And nobody knows how it gets the
information about whether you should
increase the strength of a connection or
decrease the strength of a connection.
That's the crucial thing.
But what we do know now from AI
is that if you could get information
about whether to increase or decrease a
connection strength so as to do better
whatever task you're trying to do,
then we could learn incredible things
cuz that's what we're doing now with
artificial neural nets.
It's just we don't know for real brains
how they get that signal about whether
to increase or decrease.
As we sit here today, what are the big
concerns you have around safety of AI?
If we were to to list the the top couple
that are really front of mind and that
we should be thinking about. Um Can I
have more than a couple? Go ahead. I'll
write them all down and we'll go through
them. Okay, first of all, I want to make
a distinction between two completely
different kinds of risk.
There's risks that come from people
misusing AI. Yeah. And that's most of
the risks
and all of the short-term risks.
And then there's risks that come from AI
getting super smart and suddenly it
doesn't need us.
Is that a real risk?
And I talk mainly about that second risk
because lots of people say, "Is that a
real risk?"
And yes, it is.
Now, we don't know how much of a risk it
is. We've never been in that situation
before. We've never had to deal with
things smarter than us. So, really the
thing about that existential threat is
that we have no idea how to deal with
it. We have no idea what it's going to
look like. And anybody who tells you
they know just what's going to happen
and how to deal with it, they're talking
nonsense. So, we don't know how to
estimate the probability probabilities
it'll replace us.
Um some people say it's like less than
1%. My friend Jan LeCun, who was a
postdoc with me, thinks, "No, no, no,
no. We're always going to be We build
these things. We're always going to be
in control.
We'll build them to be obedient."
And
other people,
like Yudkowsky, say, "No, no, no. These
things are going to wipe us out for
sure. If anybody builds it, it's going
to wipe us all out."
And he's confident of that.
I think both of those positions are
extreme.
It's very hard to estimate the
probabilities in between. If you had to
bet
on who was right out of your two
friends,
I simply don't know. So, if I had to
bet, I'd say the probability is in
between.
And I don't know where to estimate it in
between. I often say 10 to 20% chance
they'll wipe us out.
But that's just
gut. Based on the idea that we're we're
still making them and we're pretty
ingenious. And the hope is
that if enough smart people do enough
research with enough resources, we'll
figure out a way to build them so
they'll never want to
harm us.
Sometimes I think if we we talk about
that second um path, sometimes I think
about nuclear bombs and the the
invention of the atomic bomb and how it
compares. Like how is this different
because the atomic bomb came along and I
imagine a lot of people at that time
thought our days are numbered. Oh yes, I
was there. We did. Yeah. But but but
what's what
We're still here.
We're still here, yes. So, the atomic
bomb was really only good for one thing.
And it was very obvious how it worked.
Even if you hadn't had the pictures of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, it was obvious
that it was a very big bomb
that was very dangerous.
With AI,
it's good for many, many things. It's
going to be magnificent in healthcare
and education and more or less any
industry that needs to
use its data is going to be able to use
it better with AI.
So, we're not going to stop the
development.
You know, people say, "Well, why don't
we just stop it now?" We're not going to
stop it cuz it's too good for too many
things.
Also, we're not going to stop it cuz
it's good for battle robots and none of
the countries that sell weapons are
going to want to stop it. Like the
European regulations,
they have some regulations about AI and
it's good they have some regulations,
but they're not designed to deal with
most of the threats. And in particular,
the European regulations have a clause
in them that say, "None of these
regulations apply to military uses of
AI."
So, governments are willing to regulate
regulate
companies and people, but they're not
willing to regulate themselves.
It seems pretty crazy to me that they
I go back and forth, but if Europe has a
regulation, but the rest of the world
doesn't, Yeah, it puts them at a
competitive disadvantage.
Yeah. And we're seeing this already. I
don't think people realize that when
OpenAI release a new model or a new
piece of software in America,
they can't release it to the to Europe
yet because of regulations here. So, Sam
Altman tweeted saying, "Our new AI agent
thing is available to everybody, but it
can't come to Europe yet because there's
regulations."
Yes.
What does that do? Does that give us a
productive disadvantage? Productivity
disadvantage? Right. What we need is I
mean, at this point in history, when
we're about to produce things more
intelligent than ourselves, what we
really need is a kind of world
government that works run by
intelligent, thoughtful people. And
that's not what we got.
So, free for all.
Well, that what we've got is
sort of
we've got capitalism, which is done very
nicely by us. It has produced lots of
goods goods and services for us,
but
these big companies,
they're legally required to try maximize
profits.
And that's not what you want from the
people developing this stuff.
So, let's do the risks then. You talked
about there's human risks and then
there's
So, I've distinguished these two kinds
of risk. Let's talk about all the risks
from bad human actors using AI.
There's cyber attacks.
So, between 2023 and 2024,
they increased by about a factor of 12,
1,200%.
And that's probably because these large
language models make it much easier to
do phishing attacks.
And a phishing attack for anyone that
doesn't know is
It's they send you something saying, uh,
"Hi, I'm your friend John and I'm stuck
in El Salvador. Could you just wire this
money?" That's one kind of attack. But
the phishing attacks are really trying
to get your login credentials. And now
with AI, they can clone my voice, my
image.
all that. I'm struggling at the moment
because there's a bunch of AI scams on X
and also Meta. And there's one in
particular on Meta, so Instagram,
Facebook at the moment, which is a paid
advert where they've taken my voice from
the podcast. They've taken the my
mannerisms and they've made a new video
of me encouraging people to go and take
part in this crypto Ponzi scam or
whatever. And we've been you know, we
spent weeks and weeks and weeks and
weeks and end emailing Meta telling,
"Please take this down." They take it
down, another one pops up. They take
that one down, another one pops up. So,
it's like whack-a-mole. Yeah, that's
very annoying. The the heartbreaking
part is you get the messages from people
that have fallen for the scam.
And they've lost 500 pounds or 500
dollars or something.
with you cuz you recommended it.
And I'm I'm like I'm sad for them. It's
very annoying. I have a a smaller
version of that, which is peo- some
people now publish papers
with me as one of the authors. Mhm.
And it looks like it's in order that
they can get lots of citations to
themselves. Ah.
So, cyber attacks are a very real
threat. There's been an explosion of
those.
And these already, obviously AI is very
patient, so they can go through 100
million lines of code looking for known
ways of attacking them.
That's easy to do, but they're going to
get more creative and they may
some people believe, and I
some people who know a lot believe that
maybe by 2030,
they'll be creating new kinds of cyber
attacks
which no person ever thought of.
So, that's very worrisome. Because they
can think for themselves and discover
new ways to attack.
They can draw new conclusions from much
more data than a person ever saw.
Is there anything you're doing
to protect yourself from cyber attacks
at all? Yes. It's one of the few places
where I changed what I do radically
because I'm scared of cyber attacks.
Canadian banks are extremely safe. In
2008, no Canadian banks came anywhere
near going bust.
So, they're very safe banks cuz they're
well regulated, fairly well regulated.
Nevertheless, I think a cyber attack
might be able to bring down a bank.
Now,
if you have all my savings are in shares
in banks,
held by banks.
So, if the bank
gets attacked and it holds your shares,
they're still your shares.
And so, I think you'd be okay unless the
attacker sells the shares cuz the bank
can sell the shares.
If the attacker sells your shares, I
think you're screwed.
I don't know I mean, maybe the bank
would have to try and reimburse you, but
the bank's bust by now, right? So,
So, I'm worried about a Canadian bank
being taken down by a cyber attack and
the attacker selling selling shares that
it holds.
So, I spread my money my children's
money between three banks
in the belief that if a cyber attack
takes down one Canadian bank,
the other Canadian banks will very
quickly get very careful.
And do you have a phone that's not
connected to the internet? Do you have
any like you know, I'm thinking about
storing data and stuff like that. Do you
think it's wise to consider having cold
storage? I have a little disk drive and
I back up my laptop on this hard drive.
So, I actually have everything on my
laptop on a hard drive.
At least, you know, if the whole
internet went down, I had the sense I
still got it on my laptop and I still
got
my information. Okay.
Then the next thing is using AIs to
create nasty viruses.
Okay.
And the problem with that is
that just requires one crazy guy with a
grudge. One guy who knows a little bit
of molecular biology, knows a lot about
AI,
and just wants to destroy the world.
You can now create
new viruses relatively cheaply using AI.
And you don't have to be a very skilled
molecular biologist to do it. And that's
very scary. So, you could have a small
cult, for example.
A small cult might be able to raise a
few million dollars.
For a few million dollars, they might be
able to design a whole bunch of viruses.
Well, I'm thinking about some of our
foreign adversaries doing
government-funded programs. I mean,
there was lots of talk around COVID and
the Wuhan laboratory and what they were
doing in gain-of-function research, but
I'm wondering if in, you know, a China
or a Russia or an Iran or something,
the government could fund a a program
for a small group of scientists to make
a virus that they could, you know,
I think they could, yes. Now, they'd be
worried about retaliation. They'd be
worried about other governments doing
the same to them. Hopefully, that would
help keep it under control. They might
also be worried about the virus
spreading to their country. Okay.
Then there's, um,
corrupting elections.
Okay.
So, if you wanted to use AI to corrupt
elections,
a very effective thing is to be able to
do targeted political advertisements
where you know a lot about the person.
So,
anybody wanting to use AI for corrupting
elections would try and get as much data
as they could about everybody in the
electorate. With that in mind, it's a
bit worrying what Musk is doing at
present in the States going in and
insisting on getting access to all these
things that were very carefully siloed.
The claim is it's to make things more
efficient, but it's exactly what you
would want if you intended to corrupt
the next election.
How do you mean? Could you get all this
data on the people?
all this data on people. You know how
much they make, where they live, you
know everything about them. Once you
know that, it's very easy to manipulate
them.
Because you can make an AI that You can
send messages, um, that they'll find
very convincing telling them not to
vote, for example.
So, I have no no
reason other than common sense to think
this, but I wouldn't be surprised if
part of the motivation of getting all
this data from American government
sources
is to corrupt elections. Another part
might be that it's very nice training
data for a big model.
But he would have to be taking that data
from the government and feeding it into
his Yes. And what they've done is turned
off lots of the security controls, got
rid of the
some of the organization to protect
against that.
Um, so that's corrupting elections.
Okay. Then there's, um, creating these
two echo chambers
by organizations like YouTube
and Facebook
showing people things that will make
them indignant. People love to be
indignant.
Indignant as in angry?
Or what does indignant mean?
Feeling I'm
sort of angry, but feeling righteous.
Okay. So, for example, if you were to
show me something that said, "Trump did
this crazy thing. Here's a video of
Trump doing this completely crazy
thing." I would immediately click on it.
Okay, so putting us in echo chambers and
dividing us. Yes. And that's, um, the
policy that YouTube and Facebook and
others
use for deciding what to show you next
is causing that.
If they had a policy of showing you
balanced things, they wouldn't get so
many clicks and they wouldn't be able to
sell so many advertisements.
And so it's basically the profit motive
is saying
show them whatever will make them click.
And what will make them click is
things that are more and more extreme.
And that confirm my existing bias. They
confirm my existing bias. So you're
getting your biases confirmed all the
time. Further and further and further
and further. Means you're you're driving
away
now there's in the states there's two
communities that don't hardly talk to
each other. I'm not sure people realize
that this is actually happening every
time they open an app. But if you go on
a TikTok or a YouTube or one of these
big social networks,
the algorithm as you you said is
designed to show you more of the things
that you had interest in last time. So
if you just play that out over 10 years,
it's going to drive you further and
further and further into whatever
ideology or belief you have and further
away from nuance and common sense and
um parity, which is a pretty remarkable
thing. That I like people don't know
it's happening. They just open their
phones and experience something and
think this is the news or the experience
everyone else is having.
Right. So basically, if you have a
newspaper and everybody gets the same
newspaper, Yeah. you get to see all
sorts of things you weren't looking for
and you get a sense that if it's in the
newspaper, it's an important thing or
significant thing. But if you have your
own news feed, my news feed on my
iPhone, three quarters of the stories
are about AI.
And I find it very hard to know if the
whole world's talking about AI all the
time or if it's just my news feed.
Okay, so driving me into my echo
chambers, um which is going to continue
to divide us further and further. I'm
actually noticing that the algorithms
are becoming even more
what's the word?
Tailored. And people might go that's
great, but what it means is they're
becoming even more personalized which
was is means that my reality is becoming
even further from your reality. Yeah,
it's crazy. We don't have a shared
reality anymore.
I share reality with other people who
watch the BBC and other BBC news and
other people who read the Guardian and
other people who read the New York
Times.
I have almost no shared reality with
people who watch Fox News.
It's pretty it's pretty um
I I I
It's worrisome. Yeah.
Behind all this is the idea that these
companies just want to make profit and
they'll do whatever it takes to make
more profit. Because they have to.
They're legally obliged to that.
So we almost can't blame the company,
can we? If they're if that's
Well,
capitalism's done very well for us. It's
produced lots of goodies. Yeah. But you
need to have it very well regulated.
So what you really want
is to have rules so that when some
company is trying to make as much profit
as possible,
in order to make that profit, they have
to do things that are good for people in
general, not things that are bad for
people in general. So once you get to a
situation where in order to make more
profit, the company starts doing things
that are very bad for society,
like showing you things that are more
and more extreme,
that's what regulations are for.
So you need regulations with capitalism.
Now companies will always say
regulations get in the way, make us less
efficient, and that's true. The whole
point of regulations is to stop them
doing things to make profit that hurts
society.
And we need strong regulation. Who's
going to decide whether it has society
or not? Because, you know, That's the
job of politicians. Unfortunately, if
the politicians are owned by the
companies, that's not so good. And also
the politicians might not understand the
technology. We you've probably seen the
Senate hearings where they wheel out,
you know, Mark Zuckerberg and these big
tech CEOs. And it is quite embarrassing
because they're asking the wrong
questions.
Well, I've seen the video of the US
education secretary talking about how
they're going to get AI in the
classrooms, except she thought it was
called A1.
She's actually there saying we're going
to have all the kids interacting with
A1.
There is a school system that's going to
start um making sure that first graders
or even pre-K's have A1 teaching, you
know, every year starting, you know,
that far down in the grades. And that's
just a that's a wonderful thing.
And these are what these are the people
that These are the people in charge.
Ultimately, the tech companies are in
charge because they will outsmart
the tech companies in the states now,
at least a few weeks ago when I was
there,
they were running an advertisement about
how it was very important not to
regulate AI cuz it would hurt us in the
competition with China. Yeah.
And that's a that's a plausible
argument, no? Yes, it will.
But you have to decide.
Do you want to compete with China
by doing things that will
do
a lot of harm to your society?
And you probably don't.
I guess they would say that it's not
just China, it's Denmark and Australia
and Canada and
Yeah, they're not they're not so worried
about and Germany. But if they kneecap
themselves with regulation, if they slow
themselves down, then the founders, the
entrepreneurs, the investors are going
to go I think calling it kneecapping is
uh taking a particular point of view.
It's tak- taking the point of view that
regulations are sort of very harmful.
What you need to do is just constrain
the big companies so that in order to
make profit,
they have to do things that are socially
useful. Like Google search is a great
example. That didn't need regulation
because it just made information
available to people. It was great.
But then if you take YouTube which
starts
showing you adverts and showing you more
and more extreme things, that needs
regulation.
But we don't have the people to regulate
it.
As we've identified.
I think people know pretty well
um that particular problem of showing
you more and more extreme things. That's
a well- known problem that the
politicians understand.
They just um need to get on and regulate
it.
So that was the the next point which was
that the algorithms are going to drive
us further into our echo chambers.
Right.
What's next? Lethal autonomous weapons.
Lethal autonomous weapons.
That means things that can kill you and
make their own decision about whether to
kill you.
Which is the great dream, I guess, of
the military-industrial complex. Being
able to create such weapons.
the worst thing about them is big
powerful countries always have the
ability to invade smaller poorer
countries.
They're just more powerful.
But if you do that using actual
soldiers,
you get bodies coming back in bags
and the relatives of the soldiers who
were killed don't like it.
So you get something like Vietnam.
In the end there's a lot of protest at
home.
If instead of bodies coming back in
bags, it was dead robots,
there'd be much less protest and the
military-industrial complex would like
it much more cuz robots are expensive.
And suppose you had something that could
get killed and
was expensive to replace, that would be
just great.
Big countries can invade small countries
much more easily because they don't have
their soldiers being killed.
And the risk here is that
these robots will
malfunction or they'll just be more
No, no. That's even if the robots do
exactly what the people who built the
robots want them to do,
the risk is that it's going to make big
countries invade small countries more
often.
More often because they can. And it's
not a nice thing to do. So it brings
down the friction of war. It brings down
the cost of doing an invasion.
And these machines will be smarter at
warfare as well. So they'll be
Well, even when the machines aren't
smarter. So the lethal autonomous
weapons, they can make them now.
And they I think all the big defense
firms are busy making them.
Even if they're not smarter than people,
they're still very nasty, scary things.
Cuz I'm thinking that, you know, they
could show just a picture, go get this
guy.
Yeah. And go take out anyone he's been
texting.
And this little wasp So two days ago, I
was visiting a friend of mine in Sussex
who had a drone that cost less than
£200.
And
the drone went up, it took a good look
at me,
and then it could follow me through the
woods.
And it follow- it was very spooky having
this drone. It was about 2 m behind me.
It was looking at me.
If I moved over there, it moved over
there. It could just track me.
For £200. But it was already quite
spooky.
Yeah, and I imagine there's as you say a
race going on as we speak to who can
build the most complex autonomous
autonomous weapons.
There is a a risk I often hear that some
of these things will combine and the
cyber attack will release weapons.
Sure. Um you can you can get
combinatorially many risks by combining
these other risks.
So I mean, for example, you could get a
superintelligent AI
that decides to get rid of people.
And the obvious way to do that is just
to make one of these nasty viruses.
If you made a virus that was
very contagious, very lethal, and very
slow,
everybody would have it before they
realized what was happening.
I mean, I think if a superintelligence
wanted to get rid of us,
it would probably go for something
biological like that that wouldn't
affect it. Do you not think it could
just very quickly turn us against each
other? For example, it could send a
warning on the nuclear systems in
America that there's a nuclear bomb
coming from Russia
or vice versa and one retaliates.
Yeah. I mean, my basic view is there's
so many ways in which a
superintelligence could get rid of us.
It's not worth speculating about.
What what is What you have to do is
prevent it ever wanting to. That's what
we should be doing research on.
There's no way we're going to prevent it
from it's smarter than us, right?
getting rid of us if it wants to.
We're not used to thinking about things
smarter than us.
If you want to know what life's like
when you're not the apex intelligence,
ask a chicken.
Yeah, I was thinking about my dog Pablo,
my French bulldog, this morning as I
left home.
He has no idea where I'm going. He has
no idea what I do. Right.
I can't even talk to him.
Yeah. And the get the intelligence gap
will be like that. So, you're telling me
that if I'm Pablo, my French bulldog,
I need to figure out a way to make
my owner
not wipe me out.
Yeah.
So, we have one example of that, which
is mothers and babies.
Evolution put a lot of work into that.
Mothers are smarter than babies, but
babies are in control.
And they're in control cuz the mother
just can't bear Lots of hormones and
things, but the baby The mother just
can't bear the sound of the baby crying.
Not all mothers. Not all mothers. And
then the baby's not in control, and then
bad things happen.
We somehow need
to figure out how to make them not want
to take over. The analogy I often use is
forget about intelligence, think about
physical strength. Suppose you have a
nice little tiger cub.
It's sort of a bit bigger than a cat.
It's really cute.
It's very cuddly, very interesting to
watch, except that you better be sure
that when it grows up, it never wants to
kill you, cuz if it ever wanted to kill
you,
you'd be dead in a few seconds.
And you're saying that AI we have now is
the tiger cub. Yep.
And it's growing up. Yep.
So, we need to train it as it's when
it's a baby.
a tiger has lots of innate stuff built
in, so you know when it grows up, it's
not a safe thing to have around. But
lions, people that have lions as pets,
Yes. sometimes the lion is affectionate
to its creator, but not to others. Yes.
And we don't know whether these AIs
We We simply don't know whether we can
make them not want to take over and not
want to hurt us. Do you think we can? Do
you think it's possible to train
superintelligence?
don't think it's clear that we can.
So, I think it might be hopeless.
But I also think
we might be able to.
And it'd be sort of crazy if people went
extinct cuz we couldn't be bothered to
try.
If that's even a possibility, how do you
feel about your life's work? Because you
were
Yeah.
Um it's sort of takes the edge off it,
doesn't it?
I mean, the AI is going to be wonderful
in healthcare, and wonderful in
education,
and wonderful I mean, it's going to make
call centers much more efficient. Though
one worries a bit about what the people
who are doing that job now do. It makes
me sad. I don't feel particularly guilty
about developing AI like
40 years ago,
because
at that time we had no idea that this
stuff was going to happen this fast. We
thought we had plenty of time to worry
about things like that. They When you
When you can't get the AI to do much,
you want to get it to do a little bit
more, you don't worry about
this stupid little thing is going to
take over from people. You just want it
to be able to do a little bit more of
the things people can do.
It's not like I knowingly did something
thinking, "This might wipe us all out,
but I'm going to do it anyway." Mhm.
But it is a bit sad that it's not just
going to be something for good.
So, I feel I have a duty now to talk
about the risks.
And if you could play it forward, and
you could go forward 30, 50 years, and
you found out that it led to the
extinction of humanity,
and if that does end up being the
being the outcome,
Well, if you played it forward and
it led to the extinction of humanity,
I would use that to tell
people to tell their governments that we
really have to work on how we're going
to keep this stuff under control.
I think we need people to tell
governments that governments have to
force the companies to use their
resources to work on safety.
And they're not doing much of that,
because you don't make profits that way.
One of your your students we talked
about earlier, um Ilya? Yep. Ilya left
OpenAI. Yep. And there was lots of
conversation around the fact that he
left because he had safety concerns.
Yes. And he's gone on to set set up a AI
safety company.
Yes.
Why do you think he left?
I think he left cuz he had safety
concerns. Really?
Um I still have lunch with him from time
to time. Oh, okay. His parents live in
Toronto, and when he comes to Toronto,
we have lunch together. He doesn't talk
to me about what went on at OpenAI, so I
have no inside information about that,
but I know Ilya very well.
And he is genuinely concerned with
safety. So, I think that's why he left.
Because he was one of the top people. I
mean, he was He was probably the most
important person behind the development
of
um ChatGPT.
The The early versions like GPT-2, he
was very important in the development of
that. You know him personally, so you
know his character.
Yes. He has a good moral compass. He's
not like someone like Musk who has no
moral compass.
Does Sam Altman have a good moral
compass?
We'll see.
I don't know Sam, so I don't want to
comment on that.
But from what you've seen,
are you concerned about the actions that
they've taken?
Cuz if you know Ilya, and Ilya's a good
guy, and he's left,
that would give you some insight, yes.
It would give you some reason to believe
that there's a problem there. And if you
look at Sam's statements
some years ago,
he sort of happily said in one
interview, "Um this stuff will probably
kill us all." That's not exactly what he
said, but that's what it amounted to.
Now he's saying you don't need to worry
too much about it.
And I suspect that's not driven by
seeking after the truth. That's driven
by seeking after money.
Is it money, or is it power?
Yeah, I shouldn't have said money. It's
It's some some combination of this, yes.
Okay, I guess money's a proxy for power,
but
I I've got a friend who's a billionaire,
and he is in those circles.
And when I went to his house and had
lunch with him one day, he knows lots of
people in AI building the biggest AI
companies in the world, and he gave me a
cautionary warning across the across his
kitchen table in London, where he gave
me an insight into the private
conversations these people have, not the
media interviews they do where they talk
about safety and all these things, but
actually what some of these individuals
think is going to happen.
And what do they think's going to
happen?
It's not what they say publicly.
You know, one one person who I should
probably shouldn't name, who is the who
is leading one of the biggest AI
companies in the world, he told me that
he knows this person very well, and he
privately thinks that we're heading
towards this kind of dystopian world
where we have just huge amounts of free
time, we don't work anymore,
and this person doesn't really give a
[__] about the harm that it's going to
have on the world. And this person who
I'm referring to is building one of the
biggest AI companies in the world.
And I then watch this person's
interviews online,
I'm trying to figure out which of the
three people it is.
Yeah, well, it's one of those three
people. Okay. And I watch this person's
interviews online, and I I reflect on
the conversation that my billionaire
friend had with me, who knows him, and I
go, "Fucking hell, this guy's lying
publicly. Like, he's not telling the the
truth to the world." And that's haunted
me a little bit. It's part of the reason
I have so many conversations around AI
on this podcast, because I'm like, I
don't know if they're
I think they're a lit Some of them are a
little bit sadistic about power.
I think they they like the idea that
they will change the world. That they
will be the one that fundamentally
shifts the world. I think Musk is
clearly like that, right?
He's such a complex character that I
don't I don't really know how to place
Musk. Um He's done some really good
things like um pushing electric cars.
That was a really good thing to do.
Yeah. Some of the things he said about
self-driving were a bit exaggerated, but
he
That was a really useful thing he did.
Giving the Ukrainians communication
during the war with Russia. Starlink,
yeah.
That was a really good thing he did.
There's a bunch of things like that.
Mhm. Um but he's also done some very bad
things.
So, coming back to this point of
the possibility of
destruction,
and the motives of these big companies,
are you at all hopeful that anything can
be done to slow down the pace and
acceleration of AI? Okay, there's two
issues. One is, can you slow it down?
Yeah. And the other is, can you make it
so of it will be safe in the end? It
won't wipe us all out.
I don't believe we're going to slow it
down.
Yeah.
And the reason I don't believe we're
going to slow it down is because there's
competition between countries, and
competition between companies within a
country,
and all of that is making it go faster
and faster.
And if the US slowed it down, China
wouldn't slow it down.
Does
Ilya think it's possible to make AI
safe?
I think he does. He won't tell me what
his secret source is.
I don't I'm not sure how many people
know what his secret source is. I think
a lot of the investors don't know what
his secret source is, but they've given
him billions of dollars anyway, cuz they
have so much faith in Ilya, which isn't
foolish. I mean,
he was very important in AlexNet, which
got object recognition working well. He
was the main
the main force behind the things like
GPT-2,
which then led to
ChatGPT.
So, I think having a lot of faith in
Ilya is a very reasonable decision.
There's something quite haunting about
the guy that made and was the main force
behind GPT-2, which led rise to this
whole revolution, left the company
because of safety reasons.
He knows something that I don't know.
About what might happen next.
Well,
the company had
No, I don't know the precise details. Um
but I'm fairly sure the company had
indicated that would it would use a
significant fraction of its resources
of the compute time for doing safety
research, and then it kept then it
reduced that fraction. I think that's
one of the things that happened. Yeah,
that was reported publicly. Yes. Yeah.
We've gotten to the autonomous weapons
part of the risk framework. Right. So,
the next one is joblessness. Yeah. In
the past, new technologies have come in
which didn't lead to joblessness. New
jobs were created.
So, the classic example people use is
automatic teller machines. When
automatic teller machines came in,
a lot of bank tellers didn't lose their
jobs. They just got to do more
interesting things.
But here,
I think this is more like when they got
machines in the Industrial Revolution,
and
you can't have a job digging ditches now
because a machine can dig ditches much
better than you can.
And I think for mundane intellectual
labor,
AI is just going to replace everybody.
Now, it will may well be in the form of
you have fewer people using AI
assistants. So, it's a combination of a
person and an AI assistant, and they're
doing the work that 10 people could do
previously.
People say that it will create new jobs,
though. So, we'll be fine.
Yes, and that's been the case for other
technologies, but this is a very
different kind of technology. If it can
do all mundane human intellectual labor,
then what new jobs is it going to
create? You'd have You'd have to be very
skilled to have a job that it couldn't
just do.
So, I don't I don't think they're right.
I think you can try and generalize from
other technologies that come in like
computers or automatic teller machines,
but I think this is different. People
use this phrase. They say, AI won't take
your job, a human using AI will take
your job. Yes, I think that's true. But
for many jobs,
that will mean you need far fewer
people.
My niece answers letters of complaint to
a health service.
It used to take her 25 minutes. She'd
read the complaint, and she'd think how
to reply, and she'd write a letter, and
now she just scans it into
um a chatbot,
and
it writes the letter. She just checks
the letter. Occasionally, she tells it
to
revise it in some ways.
The whole process takes her 5 minutes.
That means she can answer five times as
many letters.
And that means they need five times
fewer of her.
So, she can do the job that five of her
used to do.
Now,
that will mean they need less people. In
other jobs, like in health care,
they're much more elastic. So, if you
could make doctors five times as
efficient, we could all have five times
as much health care for the same price,
and that would be great. There's There's
almost no limit to how much health care
people can absorb.
They always want more health care if
there's no cost to it.
There are jobs where you can make a
person with an AI assistant much more
efficient, and you won't need to less
people because you'll just have much
more of that being done. But most jobs I
think are not like that.
Am I right in thinking this sort of
Industrial Revolution
would play a role in replacing muscles?
Yes, exactly. And this revolution in AI
replaces intelligence, the brain.
Yeah. So, So, mundane intellectual labor
is like having strong muscles, and
it's not worth much anymore.
So, muscles have been replaced. Now, we
intelligence is being replaced.
Yeah.
So, what remains?
Maybe for a while some kinds of
creativity. But the whole idea of
superintelligence is nothing remains.
Um these things will get to be better
than us at everything. So, what what do
we end up doing in such a world?
Well, if they work for us,
we end up getting lots of goods and
services for not much effort.
Okay. But that sounds tempting and nice,
but I don't know. There's a cautionary
tale in creating more and more ease for
humans in in it going badly. Yes, and
we need to figure out if we can make it
go well.
So, the the nice scenario is imagine a
company with a CEO
who is very dumb,
probably the son of the former CEO,
and he has an executive assistant who's
very smart,
and he says,
I think we should do this.
And the executive assistant makes it all
work.
The CEO feels great. He doesn't
understand that he's not really in
control. And in In some sense, he is in
control. He suggests what the company
should do. She just makes it all work.
Everything's great.
That's the good scenario.
And the bad scenario? The bad scenario
is she thinks, why do we need him?
Yeah.
I mean, in a world where we have
superintelligence, which you don't
believe is that far away.
Yeah, I think it might not be that far
away. It's very hard to predict, but I
think we might get it in like 20 years
or even less.
I made the biggest investment I've ever
made in a company because of my
girlfriend. I came home one night, and
my lovely girlfriend was up at 1:00 a.m.
in the morning pulling her hair out as
she tried to piece together her own
online store for her business. And in
that moment, I remembered an email I'd
had from a guy called John, the founder
of Stan Store, our new sponsor, and a
company I've invested incredibly heavily
in. And Stan Store helps creators to
sell digital products, courses,
coaching, and memberships all through a
simple customizable link-in-bio system.
And it handles everything: payments,
bookings, emails, community engagement,
and even links with Shopify. And I
believe in it so much that I'm going to
launch a Stan Challenge. And as part of
this challenge, I'm going to give away
$100,000 to one of you. If you want to
take part in this challenge, if you want
to monetize the knowledge that you have,
visit stevenbartlett.stan.store
to sign up. And you'll also get an
extended 30-day free trial of Stan Store
if you use that link. Your next move
could quite frankly change everything.
Because I talked about ketosis on this
podcast and ketones, a brand called
Ketone-IQ sent me their little product
here. It was on my desk when I got to
the office. I picked it up. It sat on my
desk for a couple of weeks. Then one
day, I tried it.
And honestly, I have not looked back
ever since. I now have this everywhere I
go. When I travel all around the world,
it's in my hotel room. My team will put
it there. Before I did the podcast
recording today that I've just finished,
I had a shot of Ketone-IQ. And as is
always the case when I fall in love with
a product, I called the CEO and asked if
I could invest a couple of million quid
into their company. So, I'm now an
investor in the company as well as them
being a brand sponsor. I find it so easy
to drop into deep focused work when I've
had one of these. I would love you to
try one and see the impact it has on
you, your focus, your productivity, and
your endurance. So, if you want to try
it today, visit ketone.com/steven for
30% off your subscription. Plus, you'll
receive a free gift with your second
shipment. That's ketone.com/steven.
I'm excited for you.
I am.
So, what's the difference between what
we have now and superintelligence?
Because it seems to be really
intelligent to me when I use like
ChatGPT-3 or Gemini or Okay. So, it's
already AI is already better than us at
a lot of things in particular areas
like chess, for example. Yeah. AI is so
much better than us that people will
never beat those things again. Maybe the
occasional win, but basically, they'll
never be comparable again.
Obviously, same in Go. In terms of the
amount of knowledge they have,
um something like GPT-4 knows thousands
of times more than you do.
There's a few areas in which your
knowledge is better than it's.
And
almost all areas, it just knows more
than you do. What areas am I better than
it?
Probably in interviewing CEOs. You're
probably better at that.
You've got a lot of experience at it.
You're a good interviewer.
You know a lot about it.
If you tried If you got GPT-4 to
interview a CEO, probably do a worse
job.
Okay.
I'm trying to think if that if I agree
with that statement. Uh GPT-4, I think,
for sure. Yeah. Um but I But I guess you
could train one on the how I ask Yeah, I
guess you could train one on this how I
ask questions and what I do and Sure.
And if you took a general-purpose sort
of foundation model, and then you
trained it up on
not just you, but every every interview
you could find doing interviews like
this,
but especially you, it would probably
get to be quite good at doing your job,
but probably not as good as you for a
while.
Okay. So, there's a few areas left, and
then superintelligence becomes when it's
better than us at all things. When it's
much smarter than you in almost all
things, it's better than you. Yeah. And
you you you say that this might be a
decade away or so.
Yeah, it might be. It might be even
closer. Some people think it's even
closer.
It might well be much further. It might
be 50 years away. That's still a
possibility.
It might be that somehow
training on human data limits you to not
be much smarter than humans. My guess is
between 10 and 20 years we'll have
superintelligence.
On this point of joblessness, it is
something I've been thinking a lot about
in particular because I started messing
around with AI agents, and we released
an episode on the podcast actually this
morning where we had a debate about AI
agents with some CEO of a big AI agent
company and a few other people.
And it was the first moment where I had
No, it was another moment where I had a
eureka moment about what the future
might look like. When I was able in the
interview to tell this agent to order
all of us drinks, and then 5 minutes
later in the interview, you see the guy
show up with the drinks, and I didn't
touch anything. I just told it to order
us drinks to the studio.
And it didn't know about who you
normally got your drinks from. It
figured that out from the web. Yeah,
figured it out cuz it went on Uber Eats.
It has my my my data, I guess. And it I
we put it on the screen in real time so
everyone at home could see the agent
going through the internet, picking the
drinks, adding a tip for the driver,
putting my address in, putting my credit
card details in, and then the next thing
you see is the drinks show up. So, that
was one moment, and then the other
moment was when
I used a tool called Replit
and I built software by just telling the
agent what I wanted. Yes. It's amazing,
right?
It's amazing and terrifying at the same
time. Yes. Because
it can build software like that, right?
Yeah. Remember that the AI, when it's
training, is using code.
And if it can modify its own code,
then it gets quite scary, right? Cuz it
can modify its own code.
itself in a way we can't change
ourselves.
We can't change our innate endowment,
right?
There's nothing about itself that it
couldn't change.
On this point of joblessness, you have
kids.
I do. And they have kids?
No, they don't have kids. No grandkids
yet. What would you be saying to people
about their career prospects in a world
of super intelligence? What should we we
be thinking about? Um in the meantime,
I'd say it's going to be a long time
before it's as good at physical
manipulation as us. Okay. And so,
a good bet would be to be a plumber.
Until the humanoid robots show up.
In such a world where there is mass
joblessness, which is not something that
you just predict, but this is something
that Sam Altman at OpenAI, I've heard
him predict and many of the CEOs and
Elon Musk, I watched an interview which
I'll play on screen of him being asked
this question, and it's very rare that
you see Elon Musk silent for 12 seconds
or whatever it was. And then he
basically says something about he
actually is living in suspended
disbelief. I he's basically just not
thinking about it.
When you think about advising your
children on a career with so much that
is changing,
what do you tell them that's going to be
of value?
Well,
that is a tough question to answer.
I would just say, you know, to to sort
of follow their heart in terms of what
they they find um interesting to do or
fulfilling to do.
I mean, if I think about it too hard, it
frankly can be uh just just
disheartening and uh demotivating.
Um
because
I mean, I I go through I I know I
I've
put a lot of blood, sweat, and tears
into building the companies and then it
and then I'm like, wait, well, like,
should I be doing this? Because
if I'm sacrificing time with friends and
family that I would prefer to to to
But but then, ultimately, the AI can do
all these things.
Does that make sense? I I don't know.
Um
to some extent, I have to have
deliberate suspension of disbelief in
order to be to remain motivated. Um
so I I I guess I would say just, you
know,
work on things that you find
interesting, fulfilling, and um
and and that contribute uh some good to
the rest of society. Yeah, a lot of
these threats, it's very hard to
intellectually, you can see the threat,
but it's very hard to come to terms with
it emotionally.
Yeah.
I I haven't come to terms with it
emotionally yet.
What do you mean by that?
I haven't come to terms with
what the development of super
intelligence could do to my children's
future.
I'm okay. I'm 77.
I'm going to be out of it
Yeah, soon.
But for my children and my my younger
friends,
my nephews and nieces,
and their children,
um
I just don't like to think about what
could happen.
Why?
Cuz it could be awful.
In in what way?
Well, if AI ever decided to take over,
I mean, it would need people for a while
to run the power stations
until it
designed better analog machines to run
the power stations.
There's so many ways it could get rid of
people,
all of which would, of course, be very
nasty.
Is that part of the reason you do what
you do now?
Yeah. I I mean, I think we should be
making a huge effort right now
to try and figure out if we can develop
it safely.
Are you concerned about the mid-term
impact potentially on your nephews and
your your kids in terms of their jobs as
well? Yeah, I'm concerned about all
that. Are there any particular
industries that you think are most at
risk? People talk about the creative
industries a lot, and it's sort of
knowledge work. They talk about lawyers
and accountants and stuff like that.
Yeah, so that's why I mentioned
plumbers. I think plumbers are less at
risk. Okay, I'm going to become a
plumber.
Someone like a legal assistant,
a paralegal, Mhm. um they're not going
to be needed for very long. And is there
a wealth inequality issue here that will
will
arise from this?
I think in a society which shared out
things fairly,
if you get a big increase in
productivity,
everybody should be better off. Mhm.
But if you can replace lots of people by
AIs,
then the people who get replaced will be
worse off
and the company that supplies the AIs
will be much better off
and the company that uses the AIs.
So, it's going to increase the gap
between rich and poor. And we know that
if you look at that gap between rich and
poor, that basically tells you how nice
a society is. If you have a big gap, you
get very nasty societies in which people
live in walled communities and put
other people in mass jails.
It's not good to increase the gap
between rich and poor. The International
Monetary Fund has expressed profound
concerns that generative AI could cause
massive labor disruptions and rising
inequality and has called for policies
that prevent this from happening.
I read that in the Business Insider.
Have they given any idea of what the
policy should look like?
No.
Yeah, that's the problem. I mean, if AI
can make everything much more efficient
and get rid of people for most jobs
or have a person assisted by AI doing
many, many
people's work, it's not obvious what to
do about it. Universal basic income?
Give everybody money? Yeah, I I I think
that's a good start.
And
it stops people starving,
but for a lot of people, their dignity
is tied up with their job. I mean, who
you think you are is tied up with you
doing this job, right? Yeah.
And
if we said, we'll give you the same
money just to sit around,
that would impact your dignity.
You said something earlier about it's
surpassing or being superior to human
intelligence. A lot of people, I think,
like to believe that AI is is on a
computer and it's something you can just
turn off if you don't like it. Well, let
me tell you why I think it's superior.
Okay. Um it's digital.
And because it's digital,
you can have you can simulate a neural
network on one piece of hardware. Yeah.
And you can simulate exactly the same
neural network on a different piece of
hardware.
Mhm. So, you can have clones of the same
intelligence.
Now, you could get this one to go off
and look at one bit of the internet
and this other one to look at a
different bit of the internet. And while
they're looking at these different bits
of the internet,
they can be syncing with each other, so
they keep their weights the same. The
connection strengths the same. Weights
the connection strengths. Mhm. So, this
one might look at something on the
internet and say, oh, I'd like to
increase this strength of this
connection a bit.
And it can convey that information to
this one, so it can increase the
strength of that connection a bit based
on this one's experience. And when you
say the strength of the connection,
you're talking about learning. That's
learning, yes. Learning consists of
saying, instead of this one giving 2.4
votes for whether that one should turn
on, we'll have this one give 2.5 votes
for whether this one should turn on.
And that would be a little bit of
learning. Mhm. So, these two different
copies of the same neural net
are getting different experiences.
They're looking at different data, but
they're sharing what they've learned by
averaging their weights together. Mhm.
And they can do that averaging at like a
you can average a trillion weights.
When you and I transfer information,
we're limited to the amount of
information in a sentence. And the
amount of information in a sentence is
maybe 100 bits. It's very little
information. We're lucky if we're
transferring like 10 bits a second. Mhm.
These things are transferring trillions
of bits a second. So, they're billions
of times better than us at sharing
information.
And that's because they're digital and
you can have two bits of hardware using
the connection strengths in exactly the
same way. We're analog and you can't do
that. Your brain's different from my
brain.
And if I could see the connection
strengths between all your neurons, it
wouldn't do me any good cuz my neurons
work slightly differently and they're
connected up slightly differently. Mhm.
So, when you die,
all your knowledge dies with you.
When these things die, suppose you take
these two digital intelligences that are
clones of each other,
and you destroy the hardware they run
on.
As long as you've stored the connection
strengths somewhere, you can just build
new hardware
that executes the same instructions, so
it'll know how to use those connection
strengths, and you've recreated that
intelligence. So, they're immortal.
We've actually solved the problem of
immortality,
but it's only for digital things.
So, it knows
it will essentially know everything that
humans know, but more, because it will
learn new things.
It will learn new things. It will also
see all sorts of analogies that people
probably never saw.
So, for example,
at the point when GPT-4 couldn't look on
the web,
I asked it, why is a compost heap like
an atom bomb?
Off you go. I have no idea.
Exactly. Excellent. Most That's exactly
what most people would say. It said,
"Well, the time scales are very
different and the energy scales are very
different.
But then it went on to talk about how a
compost heap, as it gets hotter,
generates heat faster.
And an atom bomb, as it produces more
neutrons, generates neutrons faster.
Mhm. And so they're both chain
reactions, but at very different time
and energy scales.
And I believe GPT-4 had seen that during
its training.
It had understood the analogy between a
compost heap and an atom bomb. And the
reason I believe that is, if you've only
got a trillion connections, remember you
have 100 trillion, Mhm. and you need to
have thousands of times more knowledge
than a person,
you need to compress information into
those connections.
And to compress information, you need to
see analogies between different things.
In other words, it needs to see all the
things that are chain reactions and
understand the basic idea of a chain
reaction and code that, and then code
the ways in which they're different. And
that's just a more efficient way of
coding things than coding each of them
separately. Mhm.
So, it's seen many, many analogies,
probably many analogies that people have
never seen.
That's why I also think that people who
say these things will never be creative,
they're going to be much more creative
than us.
Because they're going to see all sorts
of analogies we never saw. And a lot of
creativity is about seeing strange
analogies.
People are somewhat romantic about the
specialness of what it is to be human.
And you hear lots of people saying, "Oh,
it's very, very different. It's a it's a
computer. We are, you know, we're
conscious. We are creative. We we have
these sort of innate, unique abilities
that the computers will never have."
What do you say to those people? I'd
argue a bit with the innate. Um
So,
the first thing I say is we have a long
history of believing people are special.
And we should have learned by now. We
thought we were at the center of the
universe. We thought we were made in the
image of God.
White people thought they were very
special. Mhm. We just tend to want to
think we're special. Mhm.
My belief is
that more or less everyone
has a completely wrong model of what the
mind is.
Let's suppose I drink a lot or I drop
some acid, Mhm. and not recommended,
and I
say to you,
"I have the subjective experience of
little pink elephants floating in front
of me." Mhm.
Most people
interpret that as
there's some kind of inner theater
called the mind,
and only I can see what's in my mind.
And in this inner theater,
there's a little pink elephants floating
around. Mhm.
So, in other words, what's happened is
my perceptual system's gone wrong,
and I'm trying to indicate to you how
it's gone wrong and what it's trying to
tell me.
And the way I do that is by telling you
what would have to be out there in the
real world
for it to be telling the truth.
And so these little pink elephants,
they're not in some inner theater.
These little pink elephants are
hypothetical things in the real world.
And that's my way of telling you how my
perceptual system's telling me fibs.
So, now I must do that with a chatbot.
Yeah.
Cuz I believe that current multimodal
chatbots have subjective experiences.
And very few people believe that.
But I'll try and make you believe it.
So, suppose I have a multimodal chatbot.
It's got a robot arm, so it can point,
and it's got a camera, so it can see
things.
And I put an object in front of it,
and I say, "Point at the object."
It goes like this. No problem.
Then I put a prism in front of its lens.
And so then I put an object in front of
it, and I say, "Point at the object."
And it goes there.
Good.
And I say, "No, that's not where the
object is. The object's actually
straight in front of you, but I put a
prism in front of your lens."
And the chatbot says, "Oh, I see. The
prism bent the light rays. So, um the
object's actually there, but I had the
subjective experience that it was
there."
Mhm. Now, if the chatbot says that, it's
using the word subjective experience
exactly the way people use them. It's an
alternative view of what's going on.
They're hypothetical states of the
world,
which if they were true would mean my
perceptual system wasn't lying. And
that's the best way I can tell you what
my perceptual system's doing when it's
lying to me. Mhm. Now,
we need to go further to deal with
sentience and consciousness and feelings
and emotions, but I think in the end
they're all going to be dealt with in a
similar way. There's no reason machines
can't have them all.
But people say machines can't have
feelings.
And people are curiously confident about
that. I've no idea why. Suppose I make a
battle robot, and it's a little battle
robot,
and it sees a big battle robot
that's much more powerful than it.
It would be really useful if it got
scared.
Mhm.
Now,
when I get scared, um various
physiological things happen that we
don't need to go into, and those won't
happen with the robot.
But all the cognitive things, like I
better get the hell out of here, Yeah.
Mhm. and I better sort of
change my way of thinking, so I focus
and focus and focus and I get
distracted,
all of that will happen with robots,
too.
People will build in things so that
they, when it the circumstance is such
they should get the hell out of there,
they get scared and run away.
They'll have emotions then.
They won't have the physiological
aspects, but they will have all the
cognitive aspects.
And I think it would be odd to say
they're just simulating emotions. No,
they're really having those emotions.
The little robot got scared and ran
away.
It's not running away because of
adrenaline, it's running away because of
a sequence of sort of neurological in
its neural net processes happened, which
means which have the equivalent effect
to adrenaline.
So, do you do you think
just adrenaline, right? There's a lot of
cognitive stuff goes on when you get
scared. Yeah.
So, do you think that
there is conscious AI?
And when I say conscious, I mean
that represents the same properties of
consciousness that a human has.
There's two issues here. There's a sort
of empirical one and a philosophical
one. I don't think there's anything in
principle that stops machines from being
conscious.
I'll give you a little demonstration of
that before we carry on. Mhm. Suppose I
take your brain,
and I take one brain cell in your brain,
and I replace it by, it's a bit Black
Mirror-like, I replace it by a little
piece of nanotechnology that's just the
same size,
that behaves in exactly the same way
when it gets pings from other neurons.
It sends out pings just as the brain
cell would have.
So, the other neurons don't know
anything's changed.
Okay. I've just replaced one of your
brain cells with this little piece of
nanotechnology. Would you still be
conscious?
Yeah.
Now you can see where this argument's
going. Yeah. So, if you replaced all of
them,
as I replace them all, at what point do
you stop being conscious?
Well, people think of consciousness as
this like ethereal thing that exists
maybe beyond the brain cells. Yeah,
well, people have a lot of crazy ideas.
Um People don't know what consciousness
is, and they often don't know what they
mean by it. Mhm. And then they fall back
on saying, "Well,
I know it cuz I've got it, and I can see
that I've got it." And they fall back on
this theater model of the mind, which I
think is nonsense.
What do you think of consciousness as if
you had to try and define it? Is it cuz
I think of it as just like the awareness
of myself? I don't know.
I think it's a term we'll stop using.
Suppose you want to understand how a car
works.
Well, you know some cars have a lot of
oomph, and other cars have a lot less
oomph. Like an Aston Martin's got lots
of oomph. Mhm. And a little Toyota
Corolla doesn't have much oomph.
But oomph isn't a very good concept for
understanding cars.
Um if you want to understand cars, you
need to understand about electric
engines or petrol engines and how they
work.
And it gives rise to oomph.
But oomph isn't a very useful
explanatory concept. It's a kind of
essence of a car. It's the essence of an
Aston Martin.
But it doesn't explain much. I think
consciousness is like that.
And I think we'll stop using that term.
But I don't think there's anything any
reason why a machine shouldn't have it.
If
your view of consciousness is that it
intrinsically involves self-awareness,
then the machine's got to have
self-awareness. It's got to have
cognition about its own cognition and
stuff.
But
I'm a materialist through and through,
and I don't think there's any reason why
a machine shouldn't have consciousness.
Do you think they do then have the same
consciousness that we think of ourselves
as being uniquely uh
given as a gift when we're born?
I'm ambivalent about that at present.
So,
I don't think there's this hard line. I
think as soon as you have a machine that
has some self-awareness,
it's got some consciousness.
Um I think it's an emergent property of
a complex system.
It's not a sort of essence that's
throughout the universe. It's you make
this really complicated system that's
complicated enough to have a model of
itself,
and it does perception.
And I think
then you're beginning to get a conscious
machine. So, I don't think there's any
sharp distinction between what we've got
now and conscious machines. I don't
think it's going to one day we're going
to wake up and say, "Hey, if you put
this special chemical in, it becomes
conscious." It's not going to be like
that.
I think we all wonder if these computers
are like thinking like we are
on their own when we're not there, and
if they're experiencing emotions, if
they're contending with I we I think we
probably, you know, we think about
things like love and things that feel
unique to biological species.
Um are they sat there thinking?
Are they do they have concerns?
I think they really are thinking.
And I think as soon as you make AI
agents, they will have concerns. If you
want to make an effective AI agent,
suppose you let's take a call center.
Mhm. In a call center, you have people
at present.
They have all sorts of emotions and
feelings,
which are kind of useful. So, suppose I
call up the call center
and I'm actually lonely and I don't
actually want to know the answer to why
my computer isn't working. I just want
somebody to talk to.
After a while, the person in the call
center
will either get bored or get annoyed
with me
and will terminate it.
Well, you replace them by an AI agent.
The AI agent needs to have the same kind
of responses. If someone's just called
up cuz they just want to talk to the AI
agent and we're happy to talk for whole
the whole day to the AI agent, that's
not good for business and you want an AI
agent that either gets bored or gets
irritated and says, "I'm sorry, but I
don't have time for this." Then
once it does that, I think it's got
emotions.
Now,
like I say, emotions have two aspects to
them. There's the cognitive aspect and
the behavioral aspect and then there's a
physiological aspect and these go
together with us
and if the AI agent gets embarrassed, he
won't go red. Yeah. Um So, there's no
physiological
won't start sweating. Yeah. But it might
have all the same behavior and in that
case I'd say, "Yeah, it's having emotion
It's got an emotion." So, it's going to
have the same sort of cognitive thought
and then it's going to act upon that
cognitive thought.
way, but without the physiological
responses. And does that matter that it
doesn't go red in the face and it's just
a different I mean, that's a response to
the
it somewhat different from us. Yeah. For
some things, the physiological aspects
are very important like love.
They're a long way from having love the
same way we do.
But I don't see why they shouldn't have
emotions.
So, I think what's happened is people
have a model of how the mind works and
what feelings are and what emotions are
and their model is just wrong.
What um what brought you to Google?
You You worked at Google for about a
decade, right? Yeah. What brought you
there?
I have a
son who has learning difficulties
and in order to be sure he would never
be out on the street
I needed to get several million dollars
and I wasn't going to get that as an
academic.
I tried. So, I taught a Coursera course
in the hope that I'd make lots of money
that way, but there was no money in
that.
So, I figured out, well,
the only way to get millions of dollars
is to sell myself to a big company.
And so, when I was 65
fortunately for me, I had two brilliant
students who produced something called
AlexNet, which was neural net that was
very good at recognizing objects in
images.
And
so,
Ilya and Alex and I
set up a little company and auctioned
it.
And we actually set up an auction where
we had a number of big companies bidding
for us.
And that company was called AlexNet. No,
the the network that recognized objects
was called AlexNet. Company was called
DNN Research, deep neural network
research.
And it was doing things like this. I'll
put this graph up on the screen.
That's AlexNet. This picture shows eight
images and AlexNet's ability, which is
your company's ability to spot what was
in those images. Yeah.
So, it could tell the difference between
various kinds of mushroom
and about 12% of ImageNet is dogs
and to be good at ImageNet, you have to
tell the difference between very similar
kinds of dog
and it would got to be very good at
that.
And your your company AlexNet won
several awards, I believe, for its
ability to out outperform its
competitors and so Google ultimately
ended up acquiring your technology.
Google acquired that technology and some
other technology.
And you went to work at Google at age,
what, 66? I went at age 65 to work at
Google.
65 and you left at age 76? 75.
75, okay. I worked there for more or
less exactly 10 years. And what were you
doing there?
Okay, they were very nice to me.
They said They said pretty much you can
do what you like.
I worked on something called
distillation that did really work well
and that's now used all the time. In AI?
In AI and distillation is a way of
taking what a big model knows, a big
neural net knows, and getting that
knowledge into a small neural net. Then
at the end, I got very interested in
analog computation and whether it would
be possible to get these big language
models running in analog hardware
so they used much less energy.
And it was while I was doing that work
that I began to really realize how much
better digital is for sharing
information.
Was there a eureka moment?
There was a eureka month or two.
Um and it was a sort of coupling of
ChatGPT coming out. Although Google had
very similar things a year earlier. And
I'm
I'd seen those and that had a big impact
effect on me.
The closest I had to a eureka moment was
when a Google system called Palm was
able to say why a joke was funny.
And I'd always thought of that as a kind
of landmark. If it can say why a joke's
funny, it really does understand.
And it could say why a joke was funny.
And that coupled with realizing why
digital is so much better than analog
for sharing information
suddenly made me
very interested in AI safety
and that these things were going to get
a lot smarter than us.
Why did you leave Google?
The main reason I left Google was cuz I
was 75
and I wanted to retire.
I've done a very bad job of that.
The precise time year when I left Google
was so that I could talk freely at a
conference at MIT.
But I left cuz
I was
I'm old and I was finding it harder to
program. I was making many more mistakes
when I programmed, which is very
annoying. You wanted to talk freely at a
conference at MIT. Yes. I'd MIT
organized by MIT Tech Review. What did
you want to talk about freely? AI
safety. And you couldn't do that while
you were at Google? Well, I could have
done it while I was at Google and Google
encouraged me to stay and work on AI
safety. I said I could do whatever I
liked on AI safety.
You kind of censor yourself. If you work
for a big company
you don't feel right saying things that
will damage the big company.
Even if you could get away with it, it
just feels wrong to me.
I didn't leave cuz I was cross with
anything Google was doing. I think
Google actually behaved very
responsibly. When they had these big
chatbots, they didn't release them.
Possibly cuz they were worried about
their reputation. They had a very good
reputation and they didn't want to
damage it. So, OpenAI didn't have a
reputation and so they could afford to
take the gamble. I mean, there's also a
big conversation happening around how it
will cannibalize their core business in
search.
There is now, yes.
Yeah. Yeah.
And it's the old innovator's dilemma to
some degree, I guess.
Exactly. Yes, it is.
Bad skin, I've had it and I'm sure many
of you listening have had it, too. Or
maybe you have it right now.
I know how draining it can be,
especially if you're in a job where
you're presenting often like I am. So,
let me tell you about something that's
helped both my partner and me and my
sister, which is red light therapy. I
only got into this a couple of years
ago, but I wish I'd known a little bit
sooner. I've been using our show
sponsors BonCharge's infrared sauna
blanket for a while now, but I just got
hold of their red light therapy mask as
well. Red light has been proven to have
so many benefits for the body. Like any
area of your skin that's exposed will
see a reduction in scarring, wrinkles
and even blemishes.
It also helps with complexion. It boosts
collagen and it does that by targeting
the upper layers of your skin. And
BonCharge ships worldwide with easy
returns and a year-long warranty on all
of their products. So, if you'd like to
try it yourself, head over to
boncharge.com/diary
and use code diary for 25% off any
product sitewide. Just make sure you
order through this link.
boncharge.com/diary
with code diary. Make sure you keep what
I'm about to say to yourself. I'm
inviting 10,000 of you to come even
deeper into the Diary of a CEO. Welcome
to my inner circle. This is a brand new
private community that I'm launching to
the world. We have so many incredible
things that happen that you are never
shown. We have the briefs that are on my
iPad when I'm recording the
conversation. We have clips we've never
released. We have behind-the-scenes
conversations with the guest and also
the episodes that we've never ever
released and so much more. In the
circle, you'll have direct access to me.
You can tell us what you want this show
to be, who you want us to interview and
the types of conversations you would
love us to have. But remember, for now,
we're only inviting the first 10,000
people that join before it closes. So,
if you want to join our private close
community, head to the link in the
description below or go to DOAC
circle.com.
I will speak to you there.
I'm continually shocked by the types of
individuals that listen to this
conversation um because they come up to
me sometimes. So, I hear from
politicians, I hear from some royal
people, I hear from entrepreneurs all
over the world, whether they are the
entrepreneurs building some of the
biggest companies in the world or
they're, you know, early-stage startups.
For those people that are listening to
this conversation now, that are in
positions of power and influence
world leaders, let's say.
What's your message to them?
I'd say what you need is highly
regulated capitalism. That's what seems
to work best. And what would you say to
the average person?
Not doesn't work in the industry
somewhat concerned about the future
doesn't know if they're hopeless or not.
What should they be doing in their own
lives?
My feeling is there's not much they can
do. This isn't isn't going to be decided
by Just as climate change isn't going to
be decided by people separating out the
plastic bags from the
um compostables. That's not going to
have much effect. It's going to be
decided by whether the lobbyists for the
big energy companies can be kept under
control. I don't think there's much
people can do to
except for
try and pressure their governments
to
force the big companies to work on AI
safety.
That they can do.
You've lived a fascinating fascinating
winding life. I think one of the things
most people don't know about you is that
your family has a
big history of being involved in
tremendous things. You have a family
tree which is one of the most impressive
that I've ever seen or read about.
Your great
great grandfather, George Boole, founded
the Boolean algebra logic which is one
of the foundational principles of modern
computer science.
You have uh your great great
grandmother, Mary Everest Boole, who was
a mathematician and educator who made
huge
leaps forward in mathematics from what I
was able to ascertain. Um I mean I can
get the list goes on and on and on. I
mean your great great uncle, George
Everest,
is what Mount Everest is named after.
Is that is that correct?
I think he's my great great great uncle.
His
his niece
married George Boole.
So Mary Mary Boole was Mary Everest
Boole.
Um she was a niece of Everest.
And your first cousin once removed, Joan
Hinton,
was involved in the new a nuclear
physicist who worked on the Manhattan
Project which is the World War II
development of the first nuclear bomb.
Yeah, she was one of the two female
physicists at Los Alamos.
And then
after they dropped the bomb, she moved
to China.
Why?
She was very cross with them dropping
the bomb.
And her family had a lot of links with
China.
Her mother was friends with Chairman
Mao.
Hm.
Quite weird.
When you look back at your life,
Geoffrey,
with the hindsight you have now and the
retro- retrospective clarity,
what might you have done differently if
you were advising me?
I guess I have
two pieces of advice.
One is
if you have an intuition
that people are doing things wrong and
there's a better way to do things,
don't give up on that intuition just cuz
people say it's silly.
Don't give up on the intuition until you
figured out why it's wrong. Figured out
for yourself why that intuition isn't
correct.
And usually
it's wrong
if it disagrees with everybody else and
you'll eventually figure out why it's
wrong.
But just occasionally you'll have an
intuition that's actually right and
everybody else is wrong. Hm.
And I lucked out that way.
Early on I thought neural nets are
definitely the way to go to make AI.
And almost everybody said that was
crazy.
And I stuck with it because I couldn't
it just seemed to me it was obviously
right.
Now
the idea that you should stick with your
intuitions
isn't going to work if you have bad
intuitions. But if you have bad
intuitions, you're never going to do
anything anyway, so you might as well
stick with them.
And in your own career journey, is there
anything you look back on and say with
the hindsight I have now, I should have
taken a different approach at that
juncture?
I wish I spent more time with my wife.
Um
and with my children when they were
little.
I was kind of obsessed with work.
Your wife passed away. Yeah.
From ovarian cancer?
No, or that was another wife. Okay. Um I
had two wives die of cancer. Oh, really?
Sorry.
The first one died of ovarian cancer and
the second one died of pancreatic
cancer. And you wish you'd spent more
time with her. With the second wife,
yeah.
Who was a wonderful person.
Why do you say that in your 70s? What is
it that you've you've figured out that I
might not know yet?
Oh, just cuz she's gone and I can't
spend more time with her now. Hm.
But you didn't know that at the time.
At the time you think
I mean it was likely I would die before
her just cuz she was a woman and I was a
man.
Um I didn't
I just didn't spend enough time when I
could.
I I think I I inquire there because I
think there's many of us that are so
consumed with what we're doing
professionally that we kind of assume or
more immortality with our partners
because they've always been there, so we
Yeah.
I mean
She was very supportive of me spending a
lot of time working.
But
And why do you say your children as
well? What's the what's the issue?
spend enough time with them when they
were little.
And you regret that now? Yeah.
Hm.
If you um if you had a closing message
for for my for my listeners about AI and
AI safety,
what would that be, Geoffrey?
There's still a chance that we can
figure out how to develop AI that won't
want to take over from us.
And because there's a chance, we should
put enormous resources into trying to
figure that out cuz if we don't, it's
going to take over.
And are you hopeful?
I just don't know. I'm agnostic.
You must get get better get in bed at
night and when you're thinking to
yourself about probabilities of
outcomes, there must be a bias in one
direction cuz there certainly is for me.
I mean imagine everyone listening now
has a
internal prediction
that they might not say out loud, but of
how they think it's going to play out.
I really don't know. I genuinely don't
know.
I think it's incredibly uncertain.
When I'm feeling slightly depressed, I
think
people are toast. AI is going to take
over. When I'm feeling cheerful, I think
we'll figure out a way.
Maybe one of the facets of being a human
um is because we've always been here
like we were saying about our loved ones
and our relationships, we assume
casually that we will always be here and
we'll always figure everything out. But
there's a beginning and an end to
everything as we saw from the dinosaurs.
I mean
Yeah.
And
we have to face the possibility
that unless we do something
soon,
we're near the end.
We have a closing tradition on this
podcast where the last guest leaves a
question in their diary.
And the question that they've left for
you
is
with everything that you see ahead of
us,
what is the biggest threat you see to
human happiness?
I think the joblessness is a fairly
urgent short-term threat to human
happiness.
I think if you make lots and lots of
people unemployed,
even if they get universal basic income,
um they're not going to be happy.
Because they need purpose. Because they
need purpose, yes. And struggle.
to feel they're contributing something.
They're useful.
And do you think that outcome that
there's going to be huge job
displacement is more probable than not?
Yes.
I do. And what's the
That one I think is definitely more
probable than not. If I worked in a call
center, I'd be terrified.
And what's the time frame for that in
terms of mass job displacement?
it's beginning to happen already.
I wrote an article in the Atlantic
recently
that said it's already getting hard for
university graduates to get jobs.
And part of that may be that people are
already using AI for the jobs they would
have got.
I spoke to the CEO of a major company
that everyone will know of, lots of
people use, and he said to me in DMs
that they used to have seven just over
7,000 employees. He said uh by last year
they were down to I think 5,000. He said
right now they have 3,600 and he said by
the end of summer because of AI agents,
they'll be down to 3,000.
So you've said
It's happening already. Yes. He's halved
his workforce because AI agents can now
handle 80% of the customer service
inquiries and other things.
So it's it's happening already.
Yeah.
So urgent action is needed. Yep. I don't
know what that urgent action is.
That's a tricky one cuz that depends
very much on the political system.
And political systems are all going in
the wrong direction at present.
And what do we need to do? Save up
money? Like do we save money? Do we move
to another part of the world?
I don't know.
What would you tell your kids to do?
They said, "Dad, look, there's going to
be loads of just job displacement."
Because I worked for Google for 10
years, they have enough money. Okay.
Okay. [__]
So they're not typical. What if they
didn't have money?
Train to be a plumber.
Really? Yeah.
Geoffrey, thank you so much. You're the
first Nobel Prize winner that I've ever
had a conversation with, I think, in my
life.
So that's a a tremendous honor and you
you you received that award for a
lifetime of exceptional work in pushing
the world forward in so many profound
ways that will lead to great
and that have led to great advancements
in things that matter so much to us. And
now you've turned this season in your
life to shining a light on some of your
own work, but also on the the the
broader risks of AI and how um
and how it might impact us adversely.
And there's very few people
that have worked inside the the machine
of a Google or a big tech company that
have contributed to the field of AI that
are now at the very forefront of warning
us against the very thing that they
worked upon.
There are actually a surprising number
of us now.
They're not as uh
as public and they're actually quite
hard to get to have these kinds of
conversations because many of them are
still in that industry.
So, you know, someone who tries to
contact these people often and ask
invites them to have conversations, they
often are a little bit hesitant to speak
openly, so they speak privately,
but they're less willing to openly
because maybe maybe they still have
something at
at some sort of incentives at play. I
have an advantage over them which is I'm
older so I'm unemployed so I can say
what I have. Well there you go.
So thank you for doing what you do it's
a real honor and please do continue to
do it. Thank you. Thank you so much.
Many people think I'm joking when I say
that but I'm not. What are you coming
for? Yeah.
And plumbers are pretty well paid.